Abstract
PCR artifacts are an ever-present challenge in sequencing applications. These artifacts can seriously limit the analysis and interpretation of low-template samples and mixtures, especially with respect to a minor contributor. In medicine, molecular barcoding techniques have been employed to decrease the impact of PCR error and to allow the examination of low-abundance somatic variation. In principle, it should be possible to apply the same techniques to the forensic analysis of mixtures. To that end, several short tandem repeat loci were selected for targeted sequencing, and a bioinformatic pipeline for analyzing the sequence data was developed. The pipeline notes the relevant unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) attached to each read and, using machine learning, filters the noise products out of the set of potential alleles. To evaluate this pipeline, DNA from pairs of individuals were mixed at different ratios (1−1, 1−9) and sequenced with different starting amounts of DNA (10, 1 and 0.1 ng). Naïvely using the information in the molecular barcodes led to increased performance, with the machine learning resulting in an additional benefit. In concrete terms, using the UMI data results in less noise for a given amount of drop out. For instance, if thresholds are selected that filter out a quarter of the true alleles, using read counts accepts 2381 noise alleles and using raw UMI counts accepts 1726 noise alleles, while the machine learning approach only accepts 307.
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Keywords
Molecular BarcodesDNA MixturesStutterMassively Parallel SequencingMachine Learning
1. Introduction
In forensic genetics, many cases of interest involve mixtures of DNA from multiple contributors. In the context of any analytical method noise is never helpful. However, noise may be particularly challenging when dealing with mixtures. For instance, if an allele is observed at 5% the intensity of a more prevalent allele, it can be unclear whether it represents an allele from a minor contributor or a noise product (especially if said allele is similar to an allele from the major contributor).
Much of the error encountered when working with sequencing data stems from imperfect duplication during the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) [22]. Each round of PCR introduces some amount of erroneous daughter products. Vexingly, these erroneous products may be further amplified by later rounds of PCR. As a consequence, error products introduced in earlier rounds of PCR have the potential to be confused with alleles from a minor contributor. This problem is further compounded by potential differences in amplification efficiency and the inherent randomness in the process [21].
The error rate of the chosen polymerase is a function of the sequence being copied. Many loci of forensic interest are short tandem repeats (STRs). While there are many properties that recommend their use for this purpose, it is worth noting that these sites tend to have relatively high error rates, both in the context of de novo mutations during meiosis [30] and with in vitro errors during amplification. A common mode of error that STRs are subject to is length changes in the form of stutter: duplication or deletion of individual repeats due to the polymerase slipping on the DNA strand [24] (but see [36]).
With respect to length (of some importance to capillary electrophoresis, CE), some effort has gone into characterizing the nature and extent of stutter. For instance, at some loci there has been success characterizing the prevalence of stutter based on the length of the repeat (see [4] and [28]). However, many factors affect the rate of stutter, and certain assumptions are made in these characterizations (for a sampling of those factors and assumptions, compare [2], [33] and [31]). For instance, if an individual known to be in the mixture is 10,11 (10 repeats on one chromosome and 11 on the other), if an observed 9-repeat allele is deemed stutter, it may be assumed to originate from the 10 (neglecting the possibility it came from the 11). In the context of CE, those assumptions may be necessary; however, with MPS more information is available to base these decisions on.
In the context of MPS, it is possible to attach unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) to the DNA being sequenced. UMIs are short (in this case, 12 base), random sequences that are attached (possibly with one round of PCR, depending on the chemistry [14]) to the input DNA before amplification [18]. Each template molecule in the starting sample ostensibly gets a unique sequence as its UMI. When the templates are copied, the UMIs attached to them are copied as well, and when the copies are finally sequenced, the UMI can be recovered. Since each starting template molecule had a unique sequence attached, it follows that all reads that have the same UMI should be copies of the same starting molecule. While the UMIs are random and can, in theory, collide serendipitously (i.e. two separate templates have the same UMI by chance), the probability of that happening is relatively small. For instance, if there are 200 template molecules at the start, the probability of a collision is about 0.12% [26].
Once it is known which reads originated from the same template molecule, it is possible to narrow down which sequences are noise. There are multiple potential ways to go about this, though one of the simplest may be to take the most frequent allele. For instance, given fifteen reads from the same template, if ten support an allele of 17 repeats and five support a 16 allele, a reasonable conclusion is that the original template was a 17 and the 16 represents stutter.
UMIs have been successfully applied in many areas of genetic investigation including multiplex amplicon sequencing [21], RNA-seq [9], lg-seq [16], ChIP-seq [13] and perhaps most notably to cancer genetics where they can detect somatic mutations at frequencies as low as 10−7 ([25], [15]). The focus for this work is to see how well they perform in a forensic context, namely low template mixtures. In particular, it is hoped that the employment of UMIs will allow for the characterization of the alleles of contributors present in proportions approaching those of typical levels of error. In the course of this focus, a pipeline for analyzing these data was developed. That pipeline was then applied to sequence data from individuals and mixtures, and the relative performance was evaluated by comparing the results to the (manually called) ground truth alleles for each sample.
2. Methods
Biological samples from 64 presumably unrelated individuals (Caucasian, CAU, n = 32; Southwest Hispanic, HIS, n = 32) were collected according to protocols approved by the University of North Texas Health Science Center's Institutional Review Board. DNA from these individuals was extracted using Qiagen DNA Blood and Mini Kit (Qiagen; Hilden, Germany) using the manufacturer’s recommended protocol. The initial quantity of DNA was estimated using Qubit High Sensitivity Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.; Waltham, MA, USA). Final DNA concentrations were confirmed with Quantifiler Trio DNA Quantification Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).
Single-source samples for all individuals (n = 64) were prepared targeting both 10 ng and 0.1 ng DNA input for target-enrichment PCR. The runs were organized so that, for each individual, both DNA inputs were sequenced at the same time in order to minimize any run-specific effects on the final comparisons. A subset (n = 30) of these individuals were selected to generate 15 distinct mixed DNA samples as described in Table 1.
Table 1. Layout of in vitro DNA mixtures prepared for QIAseq UMI sequencing.

Mixture Ratio	Total DNA Input (ng)	Pairs	DNA Input (ng)
Contributor 1	Contributor 2
1:1	10	15	5	5
1	15	0.5	0.5
0.1	15	0.05	0.05
1:9	10	15	1	9
1	15	0.1	0.9
0.1	15	0.01	0.09
Sequencing libraries were prepared as described previously [34]. In short, genomic DNA was fragmented enzymatically, end repaired, and A-tails added. The UMI-adapter complex then was ligated onto the DNA, and the resulting libraries were then purified using QIAseq Beads (Qiagen). They were then amplified with 8 cycles of target enrichment PCR followed by another QIAseq bead purification. Next, either combinatorial or unique dual indices were added using universal primers and 24 cycles of PCR and subsequent purification using QIAseq Beads. Final purified libraries were quantified using QIAseq Library Quant Assay Kit (Qiagen) and normalized for sequencing. Sequencing was performed using MiSeq FGx Reagent Kit (Verogen; San Diego, CA, USA) on the MiSeq FGx using 2 × 301 cycle sequencing.
Due to the number of variables under consideration and the preferred index complexity of each run, all DNA inputs and mixture ratios for a pair were not included in a single run. Instead, pairs were parsed by DNA input with 1 ng samples included in one run and 10 ng and 0.1 ng included together in a separate run for each pair. Based on the observations of Woerner et al. Woerner et al., [34], the number of libraries included in each sequencing run was reduced to four to generate higher read depth for each UMI family for downstream error assessment and genotyping applications. Given that the samples used in the present study have been typed previously with a number of kits and the cost of sequencing with high read depth, positive controls were not included with amplifications. However, negative controls were amplified alongside DNA samples to assess the potential of background contamination.
Prior to analysis with the main pipeline, fastq files (read 1) from each individual were analyzed with STRait Razor v3 [32] and STRait Razor Online [17] for primary and secondary analysis, respectively. Final genotype calls were made by an experienced analyst using 10 ng data. The configuration file for STRait Razor v3 analysis was constructed using the primer and anchor sequence data described previously [34] and is shown in Supplement 3.
Once the sequences were obtained, the bioinformatic pipeline detailed in Fig. 1 was used to extract the full set of potential alleles present in each sample and assign an acceptance probability to each.
Fig. 1
Download: Download high-res image (389KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 1. UMI Analysis Workflow - An overview of how UMI tagged reads are analyzed. First, the relevant features of each read are extracted, then those reads are grouped by their UMI (and summary data are calculated). A random forest is used to assess the probability that each UMI reflects a true sequence, then the UMIs are grouped by their implied alleles (and summary data are calculated). Finally, an additional random forest is used to assess the probability that each allele reflects a true sequence.

The first stage of this pipeline (extracting the locus, allele and UMI sequence for each read pair) was performed similarly to [34]. Read one was scanned through, searching for one of a set of sequences known to bracket the loci of interest, and the UMI was extracted from the corresponding read two (along with a common sequence known to be attached before the UMI). All of the reads that matched the same primer and anchor sequences were grouped together, and within those groups all reads corresponding to the same UMI were grouped into a subgroup (a UMI family). It is worth noting that this grouping was done in an exact manner: no consideration was given to possible errors in the UMI sequence, though it was recorded if a UMI was sufficiently similar (Hamming distance of one) to some other UMI (for the same locus). Additional summary statistics were then collected for each UMI family: a full description of the features of interest is provided in Supplement 1.
At this point, it is worth noting that the bracketing sequences (the locus specific primer sequence and the corresponding downstream flanking region sequence, referred to as the primer sequence and anchor sequence, respectively) might vary across individual samples (due to genetic variation, as well as PCR and sequencing error). Thus, the sequence information in individual samples may not exactly match the reference sequence used in the algorithm. Consequently, searching for exact matches has the potential to drop relevant signal. This issue can be mitigated with some variety of fuzzy search (in this work, matches within some Hamming distance), though being too liberal with the amount of “fuzz” accepted might accumulate noise in the results. A balance in the number of Hamming errors allowed (the fuzzy matching parameters) in the search algorithm needs to be achieved in order to generate optimal results. An early focus for the analysis was determining the amount of “fuzz” to accept.
Once statistics on each UMI family were gathered, the next step was to determine which UMI families implied true alleles and which were merely noise. This decision was made using a machine learning framework (specifically, random forest). To that end, half the single-source samples were held aside as a training set. The UMI families obtained from these individuals were annotated with whether or not their primary (i.e. most numerous) implied allele matched a sequence from the manually called truth data. These annotated families were then used to train a random forest model (specifically with the ranger [35] package) to produce estimates of the probability that the implied allele of each UMI family was not noise. Variable importance was evaluated as in [20].
All UMI families implying the same allele were collected together, and their individual statistics were amalgamated into bulk statistics describing the support of each allele. The values of interest for each implied allele included the counts of reads and UMI families supporting the allele (as well as the ratio of both numbers to the relevant totals for the locus), the length of the allele in question, and the bulk purity (total supporting reads relative to total reads within the supporting UMIs, see Supplement 1). Additionally, the probability that all of the supporting UMI families were noise was calculated assuming independence between the families:
Extra information was noted for the four most numerous UMI families: the number of reads, the purity, the maximum-minimum quality for the UMI, and the maximum probability of no sequence error in a read. In a UMI family, each read has quality scores for the UMI sequence: the maximum-minimum quality is the highest (across all reads in the family) of the lowest (amongst the bases of a read) quality score for the UMI sequence. The probability of no sequence error was calculated in the UMI family summary.
At this point, the aggregated UMI family error probabilities may seem like a good candidate metric by which to judge the potential allele calls. However, using this directly actually admits a lot of chaff. In order to rectify this, a second random forest was trained (using the same individuals for training as the first) to evaluate the probability that an allele implied by some number of UMI families was a true allele. See Supplement 1 for more details.
3. Results
3.1. Overview
For the single-source samples, there were 64 individuals, while each mixture case was run on 15 pairs of individuals. Some overall statistics on the runs are presented in Table 2. The Read Error is the percentage of reads supporting an erroneous allele, the UMI Error is the percentage of UMI families supporting an erroneous allele, and the Drop-Out is the percentage of known alleles with no reads supporting them.
Table 2. An Overview of the Sequencing Results.

Mixture Ratio	Total DNA Input (ng)	Average Reads (k)	Average UMIs (k)	Drop-Out (%)
Single Contributor	10	2123	106	0.0
0.1	1255	22	4.0
1:1	10	2854	112	0.0
1	2478	46	0.3
0.1	1475	18	19.9
1:9	10	2602	101	0.0
1	2642	55	2.0
0.1	1510	17	25.7
Overall, decreased amounts of input DNA tended to result in fewer reads (with one exception), fewer observed UMI families and higher rates of allele drop-out. Furthermore, more imbalanced mixtures seem to have higher rates of drop-out: as the minor contributor in those cases is less represented in the initial sample, this is expected. One other general trend worth noting is that the UMI count seems to better reflect the DNA input than the read count: a 10-fold decrease in input DNA typically resulted in 1.3 fold decreases in reads and 3 fold decreases in UMI counts. Exactly why this is the case is unclear, especially since neither tracks input amount exactly, but it is interesting nonetheless. For comparison, six negative controls were run. These negative controls produced, on average, 103 reads and 69 UMI families, with the worst cases producing 426 and 240 (respectively). Of those, there were 13 alleles with more than one read, six with more than one UMI family, and one with an assessed probability greater than 0.5.
3.2. Fuzz optimization
The first step of the analysis of these sequences was to search the reads for some identifying sequences. Since both variation and error may be present, some deviation should be tolerated, though how much is an open question. In order to determine this, a grid search was performed on the amount of error to allow when searching for the primer, anchor and common sequences. The allowed Hamming distances for each were varied amongst 0, 1 and 2, producing 27 combinations of parameters.
For each parameter combination, each of the 64 samples (10 ng of input) was run through the pipeline. For each UMI family at a locus (for a single individual), the haplotype with the highest number of supporting reads (most abundant) was considered as the primary haplotype. The results were compared against truth data (generated from STRait Razor Online [17]) to mark if the generated haplotype was correct. These annotated data were then used to build a random forest model, from which out-of-bag predictions were generated. A receiver operating curve was generated from these predictions, and the area under the curve (AUC) [12] was used to evaluate each combination of parameters.
The performance of the models under different distance thresholds is collected in Fig. 2. As per the chemistry of QIAseq, the common sequence is located close to the start of read 2 and the primer sequence is located at the very beginning of read1. As read quality tends to be best at the beginning of a read, this suggests that these should be less prone to error compared to the anchor sequence (which comes later in read 1). This is apparent in the data: the model performance (AUC) seems more sensitive to changes in the allowed threshold for the anchor.
Fig. 2
Download: Download high-res image (132KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Sequence Matching Parameter Optimization - A figure depicting the tradeoff between trained model performance and the number of reads observed as the number of allowed mismatches is varied. The reads were analyzed with different numbers of allowed mismatches in the common sequence (shade), primer sequence (shape) and anchor sequence (facets). The Number of Reads observed for each set of thresholds was noted, along with the Area Under the Curve (AUC) of the random forest model trained on said observations.

For all three parameters, increasing the allowed Hamming distance for matches produced a decrease in the model performance (AUC). At the same time, more permissive thresholds also lead to more reads available for downstream analysis. It might seem that a Hamming distance of 0 would be more appropriate, considering it has a higher AUC. However, the DNA input considered here was 10 ng, while forensic cases usually involve traces and/or challenged samples. In those sorts of cases, an increased read count may be eminently desirable, even if those reads may be more subject to noise. Since model performance does not seem to be excessively degraded when using a uniform threshold of one, the rest of the analysis was performed allowing one mismatch in the primer, anchor and common sequences.
3.3. A single contributor
When not using UMIs, the apparent read count is a large factor in deciding whether to accept or discard each observed allele ([6], [5]). Analyses vary in their sophistication with these read counts: for instance, if the number of contributors is presumed, relative abundance (in concert with allele length, for example, stutter ratio) can be used to eliminate artifacts (e.g. stutter) or include trace alleles [8]. However, a fallback approach is to simply select a static, locus-specific threshold (i.e. independent of run information, etc.) on the read count. To establish a baseline, all the alleles apparent in the individuals in the single-source testing set (when run with an initial loading of 10 ng of DNA) were collected, annotated with whether they were expected to be present given the relevant source individual, and the counts of true positives and drop-in alleles were collected. This analysis was then repeated, taking the UMI information into account. The results for D5S818 are shown in Fig. 3; a full breakdown of all the loci is available in Supplement 2.
Fig. 3
Download: Download high-res image (127KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 3. 10 ng Single-Source Calls - The number (Allele Count) of the potential allele calls for locus D5S818 in the test dataset (with an initial loading of 10 ng of DNA), grouped by the number of reads that support the call (Read Count), the number of UMI families that support the call (UMI Count) or the probability assigned via the random forest (P(Correct)). The light bars represent alleles known to be present in the relevant individual (True), while the darker bars represent potential false positives (Noise).

A higher number of unique UMIs correlates with whether the allele in question was among the ground truth alleles of the source individual. However, considering that this test case involved high quality data (10 ng was within the manufacturer suggested range for initial loading), the separation between the two classes remains less than ideal. Using some information about each UMI family could easily improve this: for instance, the UMI families that implied an incorrect allele had (on average) 3 reads, while those that implied a correct allele had (on average) 28.
Using machine learning to take this information into account yields a more consistent classification of the implied alleles in the sequence data (the third sub-plot in Fig. 3). As a reminder, the training set was held out of the error calculations: all three sub-plots represent the test set only. The assigned probabilities show a large degree of separation between the true and false alleles, in contrast to the overlap present with raw UMI counts. In point of fact, for all loci (see Supplement 2) it is possible to select a threshold that produces minimal drop-in and drop-out. Furthermore, even when taking a purist’s stance (i.e. that the threshold on a classification probability should be consistent between loci), it is still possible to obtain a grand total of 4 erroneous calls (2 false positives and 2 false negatives) out of the 4273 alleles known to be present (using a probability threshold of 0.931). For comparison, using the same approach with pure UMI counts produces at minimum 31 errors and using pure read counts produces 51 (using thresholds on the order of 250 and 5898 respectively, though the actual threshold varied with the locus).
3.4. A low template contributor
While useful, the above tests do not represent the sorts of motivating situations where interpreting samples based solely on observed read counts is ill-advised. In a forensic context, there are several ways in which a sample can be challenging: Of interest to this work are mixtures and low-template samples. Focusing first on the problem of low-template data, the above test was repeated, but instead of starting with 10 ng of DNA (the manufacturer suggested minimum), the starting amount was 0.1 ng. Looking at Fig. 4, it is apparent that using UMI counts may be less than ideal: a large amount of overlap between the true and false positives makes selecting a simple threshold on the number of unique UMIs difficult.
Fig. 4
Download: Download high-res image (148KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 4. 0.1 ng Single-Source Calls – The number (Allele Count) of the potential allele calls in the test dataset (with an initial loading of 0.1 ng of DNA), grouped by the number of UMI families that support the call (UMI Count), the probability assigned by the random forest trained on 10 ng data (P(Correct|10 ng)) or the probability assigned by the random forest trained on 0.1 ng data (P(Correct|0.1 ng)). The darkest bars represent alleles known to be noise sequences (Noise), while the lighter bars are alleles known to be present in the sample (True), with the medium shade representing True alleles with no support. Note that the x-axis of the UMI Count plot is log-scaled, meaning any true alleles with zero supporting UMIs are not shown.

The results of using the trained random forest are also collected in Fig. 4 (P(Correct|10 ng)). 165 of the 4273 alleles known to be in the samples had zero reads supporting them (i.e. absent). When looking at alleles with any support at all, it seems that using the random forest to classify helps increase the separation between true and false positives. However, the exact amount is difficult to spot in the graphs themselves. Furthermore, it is worth noting that the results in the middle plot were obtained using a model trained with data obtained with 10 ng of input: using 0.1 ng of input for the training instead produces the results in the plot on the right (P(Correct|0.1 ng)).
The two different models seem to favor different types of errors; the 10 ng model seems to favor false negatives, while the 0.1 ng model favors false positives. Directly comparing model performance can be a little tricky: for instance, how many false negatives is one false positive worth? A common metric used to capture general model performance is the aforementioned AUC. However, when negatives (noise sequences) are wildly more common than positives (for example, if there are 400k potential allele calls relative to 4273 alleles known to be present), it may be prudent to use a variant that is focused on the performance of the positives, such as a precision-recall curve. A precision-recall curve is similar to a receiver operating characteristic curve, but instead of comparing sensitivity and specificity, it compares the positive predictive value (ratio of true positives to all positives) to the sensitivity (i.e. recall). The precision-recall curves (and the AUCs thereof) were obtained using the PRROC package in R [11].
The observed AUCs for the various methods under consideration are collected in Fig. 5. With 10 ng of input, all of the methods perform similarly. However, when starting with 0.1 ng, using UMI counts improves classification accuracy over read counts, and using any of the machine learning approaches produces further improvement.
Fig. 5
Download: Download high-res image (125KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 5. Single-Source AUCs - The observed AUCs of the precision recall curves for the single-source samples (with different initial loadings, 10 and 0.1 ng) analyzed with different methods. The standard deviations in the AUCs were obtained via bootstrapping.

From a practical standpoint, it would be useful to train a single model to use regardless of the input data. Looking at the observed AUCs in Fig. 5, it seems that training the random forest on either all the data or 0.1 ng data are the preferred options. Using the forest trained on multiple DNA inputs seems, a priori, more defensible when that forest will be used on varying inputs, so the rest of the analysis will use the forest trained on all the data.
3.5. Two contributors
The second forensically motivating scenario of interest to this project is DNA mixtures. Samples from pairs of the individuals used for the single-source tests were mixed in various ratios (1–1 and 1–9) and different starting quantities were used for the initial amplification (10, 1 and 0.1 ng). The spreads of read and UMI counts for these cases are collected in Fig. 6. Decreasing DNA input appears to result in a decrease in the number of reads and UMIs, and with the 0.1 ng mixtures there were a few noticeably underperforming samples.
Fig. 6
Download: Download high-res image (144KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 6. Mixture Read/UMI Counts - The numbers of reads (Read Count) and UMIs (UMI Count) observed for each mixture, collected by the conditions of that mixture (contributor ratio and starting DNA, collectively Mixture).

The relevant allele calls were obtained and evaluated in the same way as the single-source samples. A summary of the results is provided in Fig. 7: a full breakdown of the results is provided in Supplement 2.
Fig. 7
Download: Download high-res image (84KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 7. Mixture AUC - The observed AUCs of the precision recall curves for various mixture samples (different ratios and initial loadings) analyzed with different methods. The standard deviations in the AUCs were obtained via bootstrapping.

The first thing to note is that, as the samples become more challenged (i.e. lower input, especially with respect to the minor contributor), the observed AUC seems to decrease regardless of the method. In perhaps the most extreme case (1–9 mixture at 0.1 ng), the minor contributor has (nominally) less than two cells worth of DNA present (0.01 ng). Considering that the manufacturer’s guidance for minimum variant detection using 10 ng is 5% (equivalent to a 1–19 DNA mixture) when using Qiagen’s analysis pipeline [23], it is perhaps unsurprising that the minor contributor largely drops out when using 100-fold less DNA (see Fig. 8, and note the near stair-step centered on 50% recall).
Fig. 8
Download: Download high-res image (67KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 8. 1–9 0.1 ng Precision Recall - The precision recall curve observed for the 1–9 mixtures with an initial input of 0.1 ng and analyzed using a random forest.

The second thing to notice is that, in both the most and least challenged cases, the methods performed similarly. This suggests that, in the least challenged cases, there is enough information for any method to perform well, and in the most challenged cases all methods will miss a large fraction of the alleles (simply due to those alleles not getting robustly sampled by the sequencer). However, when looking at the moderately challenged cases, it is readily apparent that using the UMI information improves the performance of allele assessment (see Fig. 7). Furthermore, in those same cases, applying the random forest model results in a further performance boost.
As a final comparison, all the data from the mixture cases were amalgamated, a sweep of the potential thresholds was performed for each method, and the resultant amounts of observed drop-in and observed drop-out were recorded. The results, shown in Fig. 9, can be useful for examining the tradeoff between accepted noise and lost signal. For instance, if an overall drop-out rate (across all samples, mixture ratios and initial loadings) of 25% is acceptable (2500 drop-outs in Fig. 9), then using only read counts to filter noise would accept 2381 erroneous alleles (with a threshold of 1790 reads). Using the UMI family count directly would accept 1726 erroneous alleles (with a threshold of 37 families), while using the probability estimates from the random forest would result in 307 false alleles (with a threshold of 0.821).
Fig. 9
Download: Download high-res image (93KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 9. Overall Mixture Performance - For each method, the total numbers of apparent Drop Ins (alleles that were accepted but not expected to be in the mixture) and Drop Outs (alleles that were expected but not accepted) across every mixture in this study were calculated with varying thresholds.

4. Discussion
There are several factors that could have led to alleles dropping out in the low template runs [29]. It is known that longer STR alleles tend to be amplified less efficiently than shorter ones (see [27] and [3]). However, given that the drop-out was only present in the low input case, the effects of stochastic sampling from a limited initial population may be a more important candidate (see [1] and [10]). Regardless of how the alleles dropped out, no bioinformatic method can recover alleles with zero reads.
With respect to mixtures, the ability to detect and characterize a minor contributor is strongly limited by the rate of error. In these data, the fraction of reads supporting erroneous alleles was on the order of 30%. More importantly, at lower DNA inputs, a large number of those error sequences were more prevalent than a large proportion of the true alleles. For instance, in the 0.1 ng single source data, there were 909 error sequences more prevalent than the bottom quartile of true sequences (out of a total of 4273). Error rates of this magnitude raise serious concerns about calling alleles in mixtures, especially as the minor contributor becomes less abundant (for instance, the minor contributor in a 1–4 mixture should be inaccessible under these conditions).
However, using the UMI counts alone cuts the number of abundant errors roughly in half (to 411 error sequences more believable than the bottom quartile of the true alleles), and using the full battery of information about the UMI families cuts that number to 12. Naïvely, using the full information should allow the examination of 1–355 mixtures. In light of the large amount of drop-out present in the 1–9 experiments, a more reasonable perspective would be that the error rate is no longer the main limiting factor in examining unbalanced mixtures at low quantities of DNA.
As an illustrative example, consider the observed alleles at D1S1677 for one of the 1–9 mixtures at 10 ng (see Fig. 10): this case was chosen for illustrative purposes. When just considering read counts, there were 21k observed potential alleles: the majority of these alleles were supported by exactly one read, though there were 25 alleles supported by over 100 reads (the most supported noise allele had 1005). Furthermore, of the four alleles actually present, those of the minor contributor received substantially less support than those of the major: the minimum support was 1536 reads, while the maximum was 10459. The relatively large amount of noise and the wide variation in the support for the true alleles casts doubt on the ability to call alleles from a minor contributor at a relatively abundant 10 ng.
Fig. 10
Download: Download high-res image (107KB)
Download: Download full-size image
Fig. 10. D1S1677 Case Study - A broad overview of the alleles observed in one of the 10 ng 1–9 mixtures. Each box in the above plot represents a single allele: the four white boxes in each subplot represent True alleles known to be in the sample (namely, 88 and 92 for the major, 96 and 100 for the minor), while the gray boxes represent Noise alleles. The height of each box represents the amount of support each allele received: support was evaluated as either the number of Reads supporting the allele, the number of UMI Families, or the probability assessed via the random forest (P(Correct)). The apparently black regions represent many noise alleles with low support. As D1S1677 is an STR locus, stutter is a common error mode, so the length of each allele (Allele Length) is also of interest.

Performing the analysis using UMIs immediately removes a large amount of noise: most of the alleles supported by one read were actually tagged with a UMI sequence that lent more support to a different allele, resulting in 1.8k observed alleles. Of those, 92 were supported by more than one UMI family, with the most supported noise allele occurring in 21 UMI families (with 65 relevant reads). The actual alleles were supported by between 103 and 333 UMI families (with between 1506 and 9472 relevant reads): importantly, there is a greater degree of separation between the true and noise alleles, as the observed signal-to-noise ratio is on the order of 4.9 when using UMI families, but 1.5 for read counts. In this case, using UMIs makes it possible to have reasonable confidence in the allele calls of the minor contributor.
The analysis of the machine learning results is perhaps more interesting. On one hand, the signal-to-noise ratio is less impressive (2.1: the most supported noise allele was assessed a probability of 0.39, while the least supported true allele was 0.82). On the other hand, the machine learning filtered out a lot of noise: exactly 25 alleles were assessed a probability higher than 0.0. And, on the third hand, the machine learning method was less variable in its assessment of the true alleles: the spread between the most and least supported true allele was much smaller with machine learning (1.2x) than with UMI families (3.2x) or read counts (6.8x).
It would be ill-advised to draw conclusions from the results at a single locus in a single mixture. However, the aggregate results demonstrate that utilizing UMI data can allow for more accurate allele calling in mixtures. In addition, this increase in accuracy can be used to analyze low template samples: as a reminder, the manufacturer suggested amount of input DNA was 10 ng, while many of the above experiments were carried out with only 1 or 0.1 ng.
It is worth noting that, in the example, the majority of the remaining noise was localized to lengths near the existing alleles. The pipeline used in this work only examined alleles in isolation: going forward, it may be worthwhile to consider relationships between alleles, especially if the more complex problem of genotype calling is to be considered.
One of the nice features of the random forest method is that, unlike most machine learning methods, it is relatively easy to get an estimate of the importance of each input variable in determining the final decision. Variable importance was evaluated for the two models used (the UMI and allele model trained on data at both inputs, 10 ng and 0.1 ng), and the values are collected in Supplement 1. However, a few details are worthy of note.
For the UMI model, many of the most important variables were those dealing with similar UMI sequences. While this work does not closely examine any potential errors in the replication of the UMI itself, the relevant importance of variables related to those errors would suggest that future work should look into correcting or accounting for these possibilities. Other variables of importance are less surprising: the apparent Phred scores seem to have some bearing on whether the implicated sequence is correct. For the allele model, the most important variable was the naïve error probability (
), followed by the number of supporting UMI families and the various read counts. The spread of importances suggests that the chain of random forest models was helpful: the initial assessment of the individual UMI families was strongly indicative of whether the allele was true, but a simple product of those probabilities is not sufficiently accurate.
What is perhaps very surprising is how unimportant the locus and allele length are. Both the UMI and the allele models placed very little emphasis on these values. This low importance could possibly suggest that, while different loci and different allele lengths may have different levels of error [19], the properties of those errors with respect to the UMI or allele remain constant. Alternately, it’s possible other sources of error outweigh the locus and length specific effects in this data set.
Several of the sequencing quality metrics were important for the UMI model. This suggests that sequencing errors may impact the implied sequence of the UMI families. At this point, it is important to note that the sequencing method used in this work produces paired end reads. The selection of primers in this experiment produced pairs that did not overlap. However, alternate chemistries that produce overlapping reads may see an improvement by performing read merging. If this is done, however, care should be taken due to the presence of repetitive sequence [7].
5. Conclusion
Noise arising during the PCR process can confound the interpretation of mixtures. Tagging reads with UMIs and using that information can aid in discerning noise sequences from alleles actually present, especially in the context of multiple contributors. In this work, using the UMI data directly consistently outperformed analysis performed with read counts. However, to get the full benefit of this information, it is necessary to consider as much of the data as possible: in the context of this work, this was achieved with machine learning (specifically, a random forest method), which, in turn, consistently outperformed using the raw UMI data. However, the model chosen in this work may still have room for improvement, either through alternative variable selection or accounting for UMI errors. Even without these improvements, using UMI tagged reads can make allele calling more accurate, especially with lower template mixtures.